.github/pull_request_template.md, before:

<!--

Thank you for contributing to TiDB!

PR Title Format:
1. pkg [, pkg2, pkg3]: what's changed
2. *: what's changed

-->

### What problem does this PR solve?
<!--

Please create an issue first to describe the problem.

There MUST be one line starting with "Issue Number:  " and 
linking the relevant issues via the "close" or "ref".

For more info, check https://pingcap.github.io/tidb-dev-guide/contribute-to-tidb/contribute-code.html#referring-to-an-issue.

-->

Issue Number: close #xxx

Problem Summary:

### What is changed and how it works?

### Check List

Tests <!-- At least one of them must be included. -->

- [ ] Unit test
- [ ] Integration test
- [ ] Manual test (add detailed scripts or steps below)
- [ ] No code

Side effects

- [ ] Performance regression: Consumes more CPU
- [ ] Performance regression: Consumes more Memory
- [ ] Breaking backward compatibility

Documentation

- [ ] Affects user behaviors
- [ ] Contains syntax changes
- [ ] Contains variable changes
- [ ] Contains experimental features
- [ ] Changes MySQL compatibility

### Release note

<!-- bugfix or new feature needs a release note -->

```release-note
None
```

Commit message:

Add a link to Release Notes Language Style Guide in PR template

.github/pull_request_template.md, after:

<!--

Thank you for contributing to TiDB!

PR Title Format:
1. pkg [, pkg2, pkg3]: what's changed
2. *: what's changed

-->

### What problem does this PR solve?
<!--

Please create an issue first to describe the problem.

There MUST be one line starting with "Issue Number:  " and 
linking the relevant issues via the "close" or "ref".

For more info, check https://pingcap.github.io/tidb-dev-guide/contribute-to-tidb/contribute-code.html#referring-to-an-issue.

-->

Issue Number: close #xxx

Problem Summary:

### What is changed and how it works?

### Check List

Tests <!-- At least one of them must be included. -->

- [ ] Unit test
- [ ] Integration test
- [ ] Manual test (add detailed scripts or steps below)
- [ ] No code

Side effects

- [ ] Performance regression: Consumes more CPU
- [ ] Performance regression: Consumes more Memory
- [ ] Breaking backward compatibility

Documentation

- [ ] Affects user behaviors
- [ ] Contains syntax changes
- [ ] Contains variable changes
- [ ] Contains experimental features
- [ ] Changes MySQL compatibility

### Release note

<!-- bugfix or new feature needs a release note -->

Before writing the release note, please refer to [Release Notes Language Style Guide](https://pingcap.github.io/tidb-dev-guide/contribute-to-tidb/release-notes-style-guide.html).

```release-note
None
```
